docs/docs/operator/building-blocks/controllers.mdx, before:

---
title: Controllers
description: Implementing Controller Logic
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Controllers

Controllers are the heart of your Kubernetes operator. They implement the reconciliation logic that ensures your custom resources are in the desired state.

## Creating a Controller

To create a controller, create a class that implements `IEntityController<TEntity>` where `TEntity` is your custom entity type:

```csharp
public class V1DemoEntityController(
    ILogger<V1DemoEntityController> logger,
    IKubernetesClient client) : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("Reconciling entity {Entity}.", entity);
        // Implement your reconciliation logic here
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }

    public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("Deleting entity {Entity}.", entity);
        // Implement your cleanup logic here
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
}
```

## Resource Watcher

When you create a controller, KubeOps automatically creates a resource watcher (informer) for your entity type. This watcher:

- Monitors the Kubernetes API for changes to your custom resources
- Triggers reconciliation when resources are added, modified, or deleted
- Maintains a local cache of resources to reduce API server load

## Reconciliation Loop

The reconciliation loop is the core of your operator's functionality. It consists of two main methods:

### ReconcileAsync

This method is called when:

- A new resource is created
- An existing resource is modified
- The operator starts up and discovers existing resources

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Check if required resources exist
    var deployment = await client.GetAsync<V1Deployment>(
        entity.Spec.DeploymentName,
        entity.Namespace(),
        cancellationToken);

    if (deployment == null)
    {
        // Create the deployment if it doesn't exist
        await client.CreateAsync(
            new V1Deployment
            {
                Metadata = new V1ObjectMeta
                {
                    Name = entity.Spec.DeploymentName,
                    NamespaceProperty = entity.Namespace()
                },
                Spec = new V1DeploymentSpec
                {
                    Replicas = entity.Spec.Replicas,
                    // ... other deployment configuration
                }
            },
            cancellationToken);
    }

    // Update status to reflect current state
    entity.Status.LastReconciled = DateTime.UtcNow;
    await client.UpdateStatusAsync(entity, cancellationToken);

    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### DeletedAsync

:::warning Important
The `DeletedAsync` method is informational only and executes asynchronously without guarantees. While it is called when a resource is deleted, it cannot ensure proper cleanup. For reliable resource cleanup, use [finalizers](./finalizer).
:::

This method is called when a resource is deleted, but should only be used for:

- Logging deletion events
- Triggering non-critical cleanup tasks
- Updating external systems about the deletion

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Log the deletion event
    logger.LogInformation("Entity {Entity} was deleted.", entity);

    // Update external systems if needed
    await NotifyExternalSystem(entity, cancellationToken);

    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

## Reconciliation Results

All reconciliation methods must return a `ReconciliationResult<TEntity>`. This provides a standardized way to communicate the outcome of reconciliation operations.

### Success Results

Return a success result when reconciliation completes without errors:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Perform reconciliation
    await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);

    // Return success
    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### Failure Results

Return a failure result when reconciliation encounters an error:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    try
    {
        await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Failed to reconcile entity {Name}", entity.Name());
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Failed to apply desired state",
            ex);
    }
}
```

### Requeuing Entities

You can request automatic requeuing by specifying a `requeueAfter` parameter:

```csharp
// Requeue after 5 minutes
return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity, TimeSpan.FromMinutes(5));

// Or set it after creation
var result = ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
result.RequeueAfter = TimeSpan.FromSeconds(30);
return result;
```

This is useful for:
- Polling external resources
- Implementing retry logic with backoff
- Periodic status checks
- Waiting for external dependencies

### Error Handling with Results

The `ReconciliationResult` provides structured error handling:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    if (!await ValidateConfiguration(entity))
    {
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Configuration validation failed: Required field 'DeploymentName' is empty",
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1));
    }

    try
    {
        await ReconcileInternal(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (KubernetesException ex) when (ex.Status.Code == 409)
    {
        // Conflict - retry after short delay
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Resource conflict detected",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5));
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Unexpected error during reconciliation");
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            $"Reconciliation failed: {ex.Message}",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(5));
    }
}
```

## Important Considerations

### Status Updates

- Status updates do not trigger new reconciliation cycles
- Only changes to the `Spec` section trigger reconciliation
- Use status updates to track the current state of your resource

### Race Conditions

- If a reconciliation is currently running for a resource, new reconciliation requests for the same resource will be queued
- This prevents race conditions and ensures consistent state management
- The queue is processed in order, maintaining the sequence of changes

### RBAC Requirements

Controllers need appropriate RBAC permissions to function. Use the `[EntityRbac]` attribute to specify required permissions:

```csharp
[EntityRbac(typeof(V1DemoEntity), Verbs = RbacVerb.All)]
public class V1DemoEntityController(
    ILogger<V1DemoEntityController> logger,
    IKubernetesClient client) : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    // Controller implementation
}
```

For more details about RBAC configuration, see the [RBAC documentation](../rbac).

## Best Practices

### Idempotency

- Make your reconciliation logic idempotent
- The same reconciliation should be safe to run multiple times
- Always check the current state before making changes

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Check if required resources exist
    if (await IsDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken))
    {
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }

    // Only make changes if needed
    await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);
    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### Error Handling

- Use `ReconciliationResult.Failure()` for errors
- Include meaningful error messages
- Use the `requeueAfter` parameter for retry logic
- Preserve exception information

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    try
    {
        await ReconcileInternal(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Error reconciling entity {Name}", entity.Name());
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            $"Reconciliation failed: {ex.Message}",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1));
    }
}
```

### Resource Management

- Clean up resources when entities are deleted
- Use finalizers to ensure proper cleanup
- Monitor resource usage and implement limits

### Performance

- Keep reconciliation logic efficient
- Avoid long-running operations in the reconciliation loop
- Use background tasks for time-consuming operations

## Common Pitfalls

1. **Infinite Loops**: Avoid creating reconciliation loops that trigger themselves
2. **Missing Error Handling**: Always handle potential errors
3. **Resource Leaks**: Ensure proper cleanup of resources
4. **Missing RBAC Configuration**: Configure appropriate permissions
5. **Status Updates**: Remember that status updates don't trigger reconciliation

Commit message:

docs(operator): add advanced configuration guide and update related sections
- Introduced a new "Advanced Configuration" guide covering leader election, durable queues, and finalizer management.
- Updated "Deployment" and "Getting Started" guides to reference advanced configuration options.
- Provided documentation for custom leader election and durable queue implementations.
- Enhanced finalizer documentation to include automated and manual management options with cross-references.
- Adjusted sidebar positions to reflect new content structure.

docs/docs/operator/building-blocks/controllers.mdx, after:

---
title: Controllers
description: Implementing Controller Logic
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Controllers

Controllers are the heart of your Kubernetes operator. They implement the reconciliation logic that ensures your custom resources are in the desired state.

## Creating a Controller

To create a controller, create a class that implements `IEntityController<TEntity>` where `TEntity` is your custom entity type:

```csharp
public class V1DemoEntityController(
    ILogger<V1DemoEntityController> logger,
    IKubernetesClient client) : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("Reconciling entity {Entity}.", entity);
        // Implement your reconciliation logic here
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }

    public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        logger.LogInformation("Deleting entity {Entity}.", entity);
        // Implement your cleanup logic here
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
}
```

## Resource Watcher

When you create a controller, KubeOps automatically creates a resource watcher (informer) for your entity type. This watcher:

- Monitors the Kubernetes API for changes to your custom resources
- Triggers reconciliation when resources are added, modified, or deleted
- Maintains a local cache of resources to reduce API server load

## Reconciliation Loop

The reconciliation loop is the core of your operator's functionality. It consists of two main methods:

### ReconcileAsync

This method is called when:

- A new resource is created
- An existing resource is modified
- The operator starts up and discovers existing resources

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Check if required resources exist
    var deployment = await client.GetAsync<V1Deployment>(
        entity.Spec.DeploymentName,
        entity.Namespace(),
        cancellationToken);

    if (deployment == null)
    {
        // Create the deployment if it doesn't exist
        await client.CreateAsync(
            new V1Deployment
            {
                Metadata = new V1ObjectMeta
                {
                    Name = entity.Spec.DeploymentName,
                    NamespaceProperty = entity.Namespace()
                },
                Spec = new V1DeploymentSpec
                {
                    Replicas = entity.Spec.Replicas,
                    // ... other deployment configuration
                }
            },
            cancellationToken);
    }

    // Update status to reflect current state
    entity.Status.LastReconciled = DateTime.UtcNow;
    await client.UpdateStatusAsync(entity, cancellationToken);

    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### DeletedAsync

:::warning Important
The `DeletedAsync` method is informational only and executes asynchronously without guarantees. While it is called when a resource is deleted, it cannot ensure proper cleanup. For reliable resource cleanup, use [finalizers](./finalizer).
:::

This method is called when a resource is deleted, but should only be used for:

- Logging deletion events
- Triggering non-critical cleanup tasks
- Updating external systems about the deletion

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Log the deletion event
    logger.LogInformation("Entity {Entity} was deleted.", entity);

    // Update external systems if needed
    await NotifyExternalSystem(entity, cancellationToken);

    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

## Reconciliation Results

All reconciliation methods must return a `ReconciliationResult<TEntity>`. This provides a standardized way to communicate the outcome of reconciliation operations.

### Success Results

Return a success result when reconciliation completes without errors:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Perform reconciliation
    await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);

    // Return success
    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### Failure Results

Return a failure result when reconciliation encounters an error:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    try
    {
        await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Failed to reconcile entity {Name}", entity.Name());
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Failed to apply desired state",
            ex);
    }
}
```

### Requeuing Entities

You can request automatic requeuing by specifying a `requeueAfter` parameter:

```csharp
// Requeue after 5 minutes
return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity, TimeSpan.FromMinutes(5));

// Or set it after creation
var result = ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
result.RequeueAfter = TimeSpan.FromSeconds(30);
return result;
```

This is useful for:
- Polling external resources
- Implementing retry logic with backoff
- Periodic status checks
- Waiting for external dependencies

:::info Durable Requeue Mechanisms
By default, requeue requests are stored in memory and will be lost on operator restart. For production scenarios requiring persistence, see [Advanced Configuration - Custom Requeue Mechanism](../advanced-configuration#custom-requeue-mechanism) to learn how to implement durable queues using Azure Service Bus, RabbitMQ, or other messaging systems.
:::

### Error Handling with Results

The `ReconciliationResult` provides structured error handling:

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    if (!await ValidateConfiguration(entity))
    {
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Configuration validation failed: Required field 'DeploymentName' is empty",
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1));
    }

    try
    {
        await ReconcileInternal(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (KubernetesException ex) when (ex.Status.Code == 409)
    {
        // Conflict - retry after short delay
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            "Resource conflict detected",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5));
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Unexpected error during reconciliation");
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            $"Reconciliation failed: {ex.Message}",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(5));
    }
}
```

## Important Considerations

### Status Updates

- Status updates do not trigger new reconciliation cycles
- Only changes to the `Spec` section trigger reconciliation
- Use status updates to track the current state of your resource

### Race Conditions

- If a reconciliation is currently running for a resource, new reconciliation requests for the same resource will be queued
- This prevents race conditions and ensures consistent state management
- The queue is processed in order, maintaining the sequence of changes

### RBAC Requirements

Controllers need appropriate RBAC permissions to function. Use the `[EntityRbac]` attribute to specify required permissions:

```csharp
[EntityRbac(typeof(V1DemoEntity), Verbs = RbacVerb.All)]
public class V1DemoEntityController(
    ILogger<V1DemoEntityController> logger,
    IKubernetesClient client) : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    // Controller implementation
}
```

For more details about RBAC configuration, see the [RBAC documentation](../rbac).

## Best Practices

### Idempotency

- Make your reconciliation logic idempotent
- The same reconciliation should be safe to run multiple times
- Always check the current state before making changes

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Check if required resources exist
    if (await IsDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken))
    {
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }

    // Only make changes if needed
    await ApplyDesiredState(entity, cancellationToken);
    return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
}
```

### Error Handling

- Use `ReconciliationResult.Failure()` for errors
- Include meaningful error messages
- Use the `requeueAfter` parameter for retry logic
- Preserve exception information

```csharp
public async Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
    V1DemoEntity entity,
    CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    try
    {
        await ReconcileInternal(entity, cancellationToken);
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        logger.LogError(ex, "Error reconciling entity {Name}", entity.Name());
        return ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Failure(
            entity,
            $"Reconciliation failed: {ex.Message}",
            ex,
            requeueAfter: TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1));
    }
}
```

### Resource Management

- Clean up resources when entities are deleted
- Use finalizers to ensure proper cleanup
- Monitor resource usage and implement limits

### Performance

- Keep reconciliation logic efficient
- Avoid long-running operations in the reconciliation loop
- Use background tasks for time-consuming operations

## Common Pitfalls

1. **Infinite Loops**: Avoid creating reconciliation loops that trigger themselves
2. **Missing Error Handling**: Always handle potential errors
3. **Resource Leaks**: Ensure proper cleanup of resources
4. **Missing RBAC Configuration**: Configure appropriate permissions
5. **Status Updates**: Remember that status updates don't trigger reconciliation
