docs/docs/operator/build-customization.mdx, before:

---
title: Build Customization
description: Customizing the Build Process
sidebar_position: 5.5
---

# Build Customization

KubeOps integrates with the .NET build process to automatically generate Kubernetes resources during build time. This document explains how to customize this behavior.

## Default Behavior

By default, KubeOps will:

1. Generate Kubernetes resources after a successful build
2. Use the assembly name (lowercase) as the operator name
3. Generate resources in a `config` directory in your project
4. Only regenerate resources when:
   - The assembly has changed (detected by timestamp)
   - The build configuration is `Release`

## Build Properties

You can customize the build process by setting the following MSBuild properties in your project file:

### Basic Configuration

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Custom operator name (defaults to assembly name) -->
    <OperatorName>my-custom-operator</OperatorName>

    <!-- Custom output directory (defaults to 'config') -->
    <KubeOpsConfigOut>$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)\k8s</KubeOpsConfigOut>

    <!-- Custom Docker image name -->
    <DockerImage>my-registry/my-operator</DockerImage>

    <!-- Custom Docker image tag -->
    <DockerImageTag>latest</DockerImageTag>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Disabling or Forcing Automatic Generation

The `GenerateOperatorResources` property controls when Kubernetes resources are generated during the build:

- **`<GenerateOperatorResources>false</GenerateOperatorResources>`**: Disables automatic resource generation for all build configurations.
- **`<GenerateOperatorResources>true</GenerateOperatorResources>`**: Forces resource generation for all build configurations (including Debug and Release).
- **Unset or empty**: Resources are generated **only** for `Release` builds (default behavior).

You can use this property in your project file as follows:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation completely -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources>false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>

<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Force automatic generation for all builds -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources>true</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>

<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Only generate in Release (default if not set) -->
    <!-- <GenerateOperatorResources></GenerateOperatorResources> -->
</PropertyGroup>
```

#### Conditional Generation Example

You can also conditionally enable or disable generation based on the build configuration:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources Condition="'$(Configuration)' == 'Debug'">false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Build Process Details

The build process consists of several MSBuild targets:

1. **BaseConfig**:

   - Sets default values for:
     - `OperatorName`: Assembly name (lowercase)
     - `KubeOpsCli`: Path to the KubeOps CLI tool
     - `KubeOpsConfigOut`: Output directory for generated resources

2. **GetAssemblyBeforeTimestamp**:

   - Captures the assembly timestamp before compilation
   - Used to detect changes in the assembly

3. **GetAssemblyAfterTimestamp**:

   - Captures the assembly timestamp after compilation
   - Used to detect changes in the assembly

4. **GenerateKustomizationConfig**:

   - Generates the Kubernetes resources
   - Uses the configured Docker image and tag if specified
   - Outputs resources to the configured directory

5. **GenerateOperatorResources**:
   - Runs after `CopyFilesToOutputDirectory`
   - Only runs if:
     - The project is an executable (`OutputType` is `exe`)
     - The assembly has changed OR the build is in `Release` mode
   - Checks if the KubeOps CLI is installed
   - Calls `GenerateKustomizationConfig` if the CLI is available

## CLI Tool Requirements

The build process requires the KubeOps CLI tool to be installed. If it's not installed, you'll see a message:

```
KubeOps CLI is not installed as tool, cannot generate stuff for projects.
Please install it with 'dotnet tool install KubeOps.Cli' to use automatic build generation.
```

To install the CLI tool:

```bash
dotnet tool install KubeOps.Cli
```

## Example Configurations

### Basic Operator

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <OperatorName>my-operator</OperatorName>
    <DockerImage>my-registry/my-operator</DockerImage>
    <DockerImageTag>1.0.0</DockerImageTag>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Custom Output Directory

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <KubeOpsConfigOut>$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)\k8s\resources</KubeOpsConfigOut>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Development Configuration

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources Condition="'$(Configuration)' == 'Debug'">false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Best Practices

1. **Version Control**:

   - Consider whether to commit generated resources
   - Use `.gitignore` to exclude generated files if needed
   - Document the generation process in your README

2. **Build Configuration**:

   - Use different settings for Debug and Release builds
   - Consider using environment-specific configurations
   - Document your build customization in the project

3. **Docker Images**:
   - Use consistent naming conventions
   - Include version information in tags
   - Consider using multi-stage builds

## Common Issues

1. **Missing CLI Tool**:

   - Ensure the KubeOps CLI is installed
   - Check the tool installation path
   - Verify the tool version compatibility

2. **Generation Timing**:

   - Resources might not generate in Debug mode
   - Changes might not trigger regeneration
   - Consider manual generation for testing

3. **Output Location**:
   - Verify the output directory exists
   - Check for permission issues
   - Ensure the path is valid for your OS

## Using with the CRD Installer for Local Development

For local development, you may want to not automatically generate resources in Debug mode and have them installed in your cluster. You can combine `GenerateOperatorResources` with the [CRD Installer utility](./utilities) for this purpose.

For example, in your `Program.cs`:

```csharp
builder.Services
    .AddKubernetesOperator()
#if DEBUG
    .AddCrdInstaller(c =>
    {
        c.OverwriteExisting = true;
        c.DeleteOnShutdown = true;
    })
#endif
    .RegisterComponents();
```

And in your project file:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Use the default behavior which does not generate resources in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources></GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

This setup ensures that resources are always generated and installed automatically during development, but you can disable or restrict this behavior for production builds as needed.

Commit message:

docs: clarify KubeOps CLI tool usage

docs/docs/operator/build-customization.mdx, after:

---
title: Build Customization
description: Customizing the Build Process
sidebar_position: 5.5
---

# Build Customization

KubeOps integrates with the .NET build process to automatically generate Kubernetes resources during build time. This document explains how to customize this behavior.

## Default Behavior

By default, KubeOps will:

1. Generate Kubernetes resources after a successful build
2. Use the assembly name (lowercase) as the operator name
3. Generate resources in a `config` directory in your project
4. Only regenerate resources when:
   - The assembly has changed (detected by timestamp)
   - The build configuration is `Release`

## Build Properties

You can customize the build process by setting the following MSBuild properties in your project file:

### Basic Configuration

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Custom operator name (defaults to assembly name) -->
    <OperatorName>my-custom-operator</OperatorName>

    <!-- Custom output directory (defaults to 'config') -->
    <KubeOpsConfigOut>$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)\k8s</KubeOpsConfigOut>

    <!-- Custom Docker image name -->
    <DockerImage>my-registry/my-operator</DockerImage>

    <!-- Custom Docker image tag -->
    <DockerImageTag>latest</DockerImageTag>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Disabling or Forcing Automatic Generation

The `GenerateOperatorResources` property controls when Kubernetes resources are generated during the build:

- **`<GenerateOperatorResources>false</GenerateOperatorResources>`**: Disables automatic resource generation for all build configurations.
- **`<GenerateOperatorResources>true</GenerateOperatorResources>`**: Forces resource generation for all build configurations (including Debug and Release).
- **Unset or empty**: Resources are generated **only** for `Release` builds (default behavior).

You can use this property in your project file as follows:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation completely -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources>false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>

<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Force automatic generation for all builds -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources>true</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>

<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Only generate in Release (default if not set) -->
    <!-- <GenerateOperatorResources></GenerateOperatorResources> -->
</PropertyGroup>
```

#### Conditional Generation Example

You can also conditionally enable or disable generation based on the build configuration:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources Condition="'$(Configuration)' == 'Debug'">false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Build Process Details

The build process consists of several MSBuild targets:

1. **BaseConfig**:

   - Sets default values for:
     - `OperatorName`: Assembly name (lowercase)
     - `KubeOpsCli`: Path to the KubeOps CLI tool
     - `KubeOpsConfigOut`: Output directory for generated resources

2. **GetAssemblyBeforeTimestamp**:

   - Captures the assembly timestamp before compilation
   - Used to detect changes in the assembly

3. **GetAssemblyAfterTimestamp**:

   - Captures the assembly timestamp after compilation
   - Used to detect changes in the assembly

4. **GenerateKustomizationConfig**:

   - Generates the Kubernetes resources
   - Uses the configured Docker image and tag if specified
   - Outputs resources to the configured directory

5. **GenerateOperatorResources**:
   - Runs after `CopyFilesToOutputDirectory`
   - Only runs if:
     - The project is an executable (`OutputType` is `exe`)
     - The assembly has changed OR the build is in `Release` mode
   - Checks if the KubeOps CLI is installed
   - Calls `GenerateKustomizationConfig` if the CLI is available

## CLI Tool Requirements

The build process requires the KubeOps CLI tool to be installed. If it's not installed, you'll see a message:

```
KubeOps CLI is not installed or not available. Install it as a .NET tool (e.g. 'dotnet tool install KubeOps.Cli' or 'dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli'), or override <KubeOpsCli> in your project.
```

To install the CLI tool (local tool is recommended):

```bash
# Local tool (recommended)
dotnet new tool-manifest
dotnet tool install --local KubeOps.Cli

# Global tool
dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli
```

:::note Local vs global tools
Local tools are not added to your `PATH`. When KubeOps runs as part of the build, it can invoke a locally installed CLI via `dotnet tool run kubeops`.
:::

If you need to override how the CLI is invoked (for example, when installing to a custom tool path), you can set the `KubeOpsCli` MSBuild property:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <KubeOpsCli>dotnet tool run kubeops</KubeOpsCli>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Example Configurations

### Basic Operator

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <OperatorName>my-operator</OperatorName>
    <DockerImage>my-registry/my-operator</DockerImage>
    <DockerImageTag>1.0.0</DockerImageTag>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Custom Output Directory

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <KubeOpsConfigOut>$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)\k8s\resources</KubeOpsConfigOut>
</PropertyGroup>
```

### Development Configuration

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Disable automatic generation in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources Condition="'$(Configuration)' == 'Debug'">false</GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Best Practices

1. **Version Control**:

   - Consider whether to commit generated resources
   - Use `.gitignore` to exclude generated files if needed
   - Document the generation process in your README

2. **Build Configuration**:

   - Use different settings for Debug and Release builds
   - Consider using environment-specific configurations
   - Document your build customization in the project

3. **Docker Images**:
   - Use consistent naming conventions
   - Include version information in tags
   - Consider using multi-stage builds

## Common Issues

1. **Missing CLI Tool**:

   - Ensure the KubeOps CLI is installed
   - Check the tool installation path
   - Verify the tool version compatibility

2. **Generation Timing**:

   - Resources might not generate in Debug mode
   - Changes might not trigger regeneration
   - Consider manual generation for testing

3. **Output Location**:
   - Verify the output directory exists
   - Check for permission issues
   - Ensure the path is valid for your OS

## Using with the CRD Installer for Local Development

For local development, you may want to not automatically generate resources in Debug mode and have them installed in your cluster. You can combine `GenerateOperatorResources` with the [CRD Installer utility](./utilities) for this purpose.

For example, in your `Program.cs`:

```csharp
builder.Services
    .AddKubernetesOperator()
#if DEBUG
    .AddCrdInstaller(c =>
    {
        c.OverwriteExisting = true;
        c.DeleteOnShutdown = true;
    })
#endif
    .RegisterComponents();
```

And in your project file:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Use the default behavior which does not generate resources in Debug mode -->
    <GenerateOperatorResources></GenerateOperatorResources>
</PropertyGroup>
```

This setup ensures that resources are always generated and installed automatically during development, but you can disable or restrict this behavior for production builds as needed.
