docs/docs/operator/cli.mdx, before:

---
title: CLI
description: Using the KubeOps CLI
sidebar_position: 3
---

# Using the KubeOps CLI

The KubeOps CLI is a command-line tool that helps you manage your operator development workflow. It provides commands for generating Kubernetes resources, managing CRDs, and checking cluster information.

## Installation

Install the CLI globally:

```bash
dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli
```

Or locally in your project:

```bash
dotnet new tool-manifest
dotnet tool install --local KubeOps.Cli
```

## Development Workflow

During local development, you'll primarily use the `install` and `uninstall` commands to manage your operator's CRDs in your development cluster.

### Installing CRDs

To install your operator's CRDs into your development cluster:

```bash
kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This command:

- Analyzes your project for custom resources
- Generates the necessary CRDs
- Installs them into your current Kubernetes context

:::warning Production Usage
The `install` and `uninstall` commands are primarily intended for development purposes. In production, you should use the generated Kubernetes manifests and your preferred deployment method (e.g., Helm, Kustomize, or GitOps).
:::

### Uninstalling CRDs

To remove your operator's CRDs from the development cluster:

```bash
kubeops uninstall ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This is useful when:

- Testing different versions of your CRDs
- Cleaning up after development
- Troubleshooting CRD-related issues

## Resource Generation

The `generate` command creates all necessary Kubernetes resources for your operator:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This generates:

- RBAC rules
- Dockerfile
- Deployment configuration
- CRDs
- Namespace configuration
- Kustomization files

:::note Build Integration
The resource generation is automatically included in the build process. You don't need to run the generate command manually unless you want to customize the output location or format. See [Build Customization](./build-customization) for details on configuring the build process.
:::

### Generation Options

The generate command supports several options:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj --out ./k8s --format yaml
```

Common options:

- `--out`: Specify output directory
- `--format`: Choose output format (yaml/json)
- `--clear-out`: Clear output directory before generation
- `--docker-image`: Specify Docker image name
- `--docker-image-tag`: Specify Docker image tag

## Cluster Information

The `version` command shows information about your current Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubeops api-version
```

This displays:

- Git version
- Major version
- Minor version
- Platform information

This is useful for:

- Verifying cluster connectivity
- Checking compatibility
- Troubleshooting issues

## Command Reference

### Global Options

All commands support these options:

- `--force` or `-f`: Skip confirmation prompts
- `--project`: Regex pattern to filter projects in a solution
- `--target-framework`: Specify target framework for solution projects

### Common Use Cases

1. **Development Setup**:

   ```bash
   # Install CRDs for development
   kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj

   # Generate resources for deployment
   kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj
   ```

2. **Testing Different Versions**:

   ```bash
   # Uninstall current version
   kubeops uninstall ./MyOperator.csproj

   # Install new version
   kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj
   ```

3. **Custom Resource Generation**:
   ```bash
   # Generate resources with custom output
   kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj --out ./k8s --format yaml
   ```

Commit message:

docs: clarify KubeOps CLI tool usage

docs/docs/operator/cli.mdx, after:

---
title: CLI
description: Using the KubeOps CLI
sidebar_position: 3
---

# Using the KubeOps CLI

The KubeOps CLI is a command-line tool that helps you manage your operator development workflow. It provides commands for generating Kubernetes resources, managing CRDs, and checking cluster information.

## Installation

Install the CLI globally:

```bash
dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli
```

Or locally in your project:

```bash
dotnet new tool-manifest
dotnet tool install --local KubeOps.Cli
```

:::note Command syntax
Examples below use the global `kubeops` command. If you installed the tool locally, replace `kubeops ...` with `dotnet tool run kubeops ...`.
:::

## Development Workflow

During local development, you'll primarily use the `install` and `uninstall` commands to manage your operator's CRDs in your development cluster.

### Installing CRDs

To install your operator's CRDs into your development cluster:

```bash
kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This command:

- Analyzes your project for custom resources
- Generates the necessary CRDs
- Installs them into your current Kubernetes context

:::warning Production Usage
The `install` and `uninstall` commands are primarily intended for development purposes. In production, you should use the generated Kubernetes manifests and your preferred deployment method (e.g., Helm, Kustomize, or GitOps).
:::

### Uninstalling CRDs

To remove your operator's CRDs from the development cluster:

```bash
kubeops uninstall ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This is useful when:

- Testing different versions of your CRDs
- Cleaning up after development
- Troubleshooting CRD-related issues

## Resource Generation

The `generate` command creates all necessary Kubernetes resources for your operator:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj
```

This generates:

- RBAC rules
- Dockerfile
- Deployment configuration
- CRDs
- Namespace configuration
- Kustomization files

:::note Build Integration
The resource generation is automatically included in the build process. You don't need to run the generate command manually unless you want to customize the output location or format. See [Build Customization](./build-customization) for details on configuring the build process.
:::

### Generation Options

The generate command supports several options:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj --out ./k8s --format yaml
```

Common options:

- `--out`: Specify output directory
- `--format`: Choose output format (yaml/json)
- `--clear-out`: Clear output directory before generation
- `--docker-image`: Specify Docker image name
- `--docker-image-tag`: Specify Docker image tag

## Cluster Information

The `version` command shows information about your current Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubeops api-version
```

This displays:

- Git version
- Major version
- Minor version
- Platform information

This is useful for:

- Verifying cluster connectivity
- Checking compatibility
- Troubleshooting issues

## Command Reference

### Global Options

All commands support these options:

- `--force` or `-f`: Skip confirmation prompts
- `--project`: Regex pattern to filter projects in a solution
- `--target-framework`: Specify target framework for solution projects

### Common Use Cases

1. **Development Setup**:

   ```bash
   # Install CRDs for development
   kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj

   # Generate resources for deployment
   kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj
   ```

2. **Testing Different Versions**:

   ```bash
   # Uninstall current version
   kubeops uninstall ./MyOperator.csproj

   # Install new version
   kubeops install ./MyOperator.csproj
   ```

3. **Custom Resource Generation**:
   ```bash
   # Generate resources with custom output
   kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyOperator.csproj --out ./k8s --format yaml
   ```
