docs/docs/operator/getting-started.mdx, before:

---
title: Getting Started
description: Getting Started with KubeOps
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Getting Started with KubeOps

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- [.NET 8.0 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) or later
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)
- A local Kubernetes cluster (like [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) or [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/))

:::warning Development Environment
For local development, we recommend using `kind` or Docker Desktop, which provide lightweight Kubernetes clusters ideal for operator development. Ensure your cluster is running before proceeding with the installation steps.
:::

## Installing KubeOps Templates

KubeOps provides templates to help you get started quickly. Install them using the .NET CLI:

```bash
dotnet new install KubeOps.Templates
```

KubeOps offers several template types:

- `operator`: Standard operator with demo implementations
- `operator-empty`: Minimal operator without web capabilities
- `operator-web`: Operator with web server capabilities and demo implementations
- `operator-web-empty`: Minimal operator with web server capabilities

## Creating Your First Operator

Let's create a new operator project using the standard template:

```bash
dotnet new operator -n MyFirstOperator
cd MyFirstOperator
```

The template creates a complete operator project structure with:

- `Program.cs`: Entry point of your operator
- `Entities/`: Directory for your custom resources
- `Controllers/`: Directory for your controllers
- `Finalizers/`: Directory for your finalizers
- `Webhooks/`: Directory for webhooks (if using web operator)

## Installing the KubeOps CLI

The KubeOps CLI helps you manage your operator development workflow. Install it globally:

```bash
dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli
```

Or locally in your project:

```bash
dotnet new tool-manifest
dotnet tool install --local KubeOps.Cli
```

## Using the KubeOps CLI

The CLI provides several useful commands:

### Generate Resources

Generate all necessary Kubernetes resources for your operator:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

:::note Automatic Generation
The resource generation is automatically included in the build process. You don't need to run the generate command manually unless you want to customize the output location or format.
:::

This command generates:

- RBAC rules
- Dockerfile
- Deployment configuration
- CRDs (Custom Resource Definitions)
- Namespace configuration
- Kustomization files

:::warning Webhook Support
If your operator includes webhooks, additional resources are generated:

- CA and Server certificates
- Webhook configurations
- Service definitions
- Secret generators

Make sure to handle these certificates securely in production environments.
:::

### Install CRDs

Install your operator's CRDs into your Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubeops install ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

### Uninstall CRDs

Remove your operator's CRDs from the cluster:

```bash
kubeops uninstall ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

## Building Blocks of an Operator

KubeOps operators are built using several key components:

### Custom Resources (Entities)

Custom resources are defined as C# classes with the `[KubernetesEntity]` attribute:

```csharp
[KubernetesEntity(Group = "demo.kubeops.dev", ApiVersion = "v1", Kind = "DemoEntity")]
public class V1DemoEntity : CustomKubernetesEntity<V1DemoEntity.V1DemoEntitySpec, V1DemoEntity.V1DemoEntityStatus>
{
    public class V1DemoEntitySpec
    {
        public string Username { get; set; } = string.Empty;
    }

    public class V1DemoEntityStatus
    {
        public string DemoStatus { get; set; } = string.Empty;
    }
}
```

### Controllers

Controllers implement the reconciliation logic for your custom resources:

```csharp
[EntityRbac(typeof(V1DemoEntity), Verbs = RbacVerb.All)]
public class DemoController : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Implement your reconciliation logic here
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }

    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Handle deletion event
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }
}
```

### Finalizers

Finalizers handle cleanup when resources are deleted:

```csharp
public class DemoFinalizer : IEntityFinalizer<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> FinalizeAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Implement your cleanup logic here
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }
}
```

:::info Next Steps
The following sections will dive deeper into:

- [CLI Usage](./cli) - Detailed CLI commands and options
- [Custom Resources](./building-blocks/entities) - Creating and managing custom resources
- [Controllers](./building-blocks/controllers) - Implementing reconciliation logic
- [Finalizers](./building-blocks/finalizer) - Handling resource cleanup
- [Webhooks](./building-blocks/webhooks) - Implementing validation and mutation webhooks
- [Advanced Configuration](./advanced-configuration) - Leader election, durable queues, and finalizer management

Make sure to read these sections before deploying your operator to production.
:::

:::tip Learning Path
Take your time to understand each concept. Building operators is a complex task, but KubeOps makes it more approachable for .NET developers.
:::

Commit message:

docs: clarify KubeOps CLI tool usage

docs/docs/operator/getting-started.mdx, after:

---
title: Getting Started
description: Getting Started with KubeOps
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Getting Started with KubeOps

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- [.NET 8.0 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) or later
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)
- A local Kubernetes cluster (like [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) or [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/))

:::warning Development Environment
For local development, we recommend using `kind` or Docker Desktop, which provide lightweight Kubernetes clusters ideal for operator development. Ensure your cluster is running before proceeding with the installation steps.
:::

## Installing KubeOps Templates

KubeOps provides templates to help you get started quickly. Install them using the .NET CLI:

```bash
dotnet new install KubeOps.Templates
```

KubeOps offers several template types:

- `operator`: Standard operator with demo implementations
- `operator-empty`: Minimal operator without web capabilities
- `operator-web`: Operator with web server capabilities and demo implementations
- `operator-web-empty`: Minimal operator with web server capabilities

## Creating Your First Operator

Let's create a new operator project using the standard template:

```bash
dotnet new operator -n MyFirstOperator
cd MyFirstOperator
```

The template creates a complete operator project structure with:

- `Program.cs`: Entry point of your operator
- `Entities/`: Directory for your custom resources
- `Controllers/`: Directory for your controllers
- `Finalizers/`: Directory for your finalizers
- `Webhooks/`: Directory for webhooks (if using web operator)

## Installing the KubeOps CLI

The KubeOps CLI helps you manage your operator development workflow. Install it globally:

```bash
dotnet tool install --global KubeOps.Cli
```

Or locally in your project:

```bash
dotnet new tool-manifest
dotnet tool install --local KubeOps.Cli
```

## Using the KubeOps CLI

The CLI provides several useful commands:

:::note Command syntax
Examples below use the global `kubeops` command. If you installed the tool locally, replace `kubeops ...` with `dotnet tool run kubeops ...`.
:::

### Generate Resources

Generate all necessary Kubernetes resources for your operator:

```bash
kubeops generate operator MyOperator ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

:::note Automatic Generation
The resource generation is automatically included in the build process. You don't need to run the generate command manually unless you want to customize the output location or format.
:::

This command generates:

- RBAC rules
- Dockerfile
- Deployment configuration
- CRDs (Custom Resource Definitions)
- Namespace configuration
- Kustomization files

:::warning Webhook Support
If your operator includes webhooks, additional resources are generated:

- CA and Server certificates
- Webhook configurations
- Service definitions
- Secret generators

Make sure to handle these certificates securely in production environments.
:::

### Install CRDs

Install your operator's CRDs into your Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
kubeops install ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

### Uninstall CRDs

Remove your operator's CRDs from the cluster:

```bash
kubeops uninstall ./MyFirstOperator.csproj
```

## Building Blocks of an Operator

KubeOps operators are built using several key components:

### Custom Resources (Entities)

Custom resources are defined as C# classes with the `[KubernetesEntity]` attribute:

```csharp
[KubernetesEntity(Group = "demo.kubeops.dev", ApiVersion = "v1", Kind = "DemoEntity")]
public class V1DemoEntity : CustomKubernetesEntity<V1DemoEntity.V1DemoEntitySpec, V1DemoEntity.V1DemoEntityStatus>
{
    public class V1DemoEntitySpec
    {
        public string Username { get; set; } = string.Empty;
    }

    public class V1DemoEntityStatus
    {
        public string DemoStatus { get; set; } = string.Empty;
    }
}
```

### Controllers

Controllers implement the reconciliation logic for your custom resources:

```csharp
[EntityRbac(typeof(V1DemoEntity), Verbs = RbacVerb.All)]
public class DemoController : IEntityController<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> ReconcileAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Implement your reconciliation logic here
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }

    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> DeletedAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Handle deletion event
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }
}
```

### Finalizers

Finalizers handle cleanup when resources are deleted:

```csharp
public class DemoFinalizer : IEntityFinalizer<V1DemoEntity>
{
    public Task<ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>> FinalizeAsync(
        V1DemoEntity entity,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Implement your cleanup logic here
        return Task.FromResult(ReconciliationResult<V1DemoEntity>.Success(entity));
    }
}
```

:::info Next Steps
The following sections will dive deeper into:

- [CLI Usage](./cli) - Detailed CLI commands and options
- [Custom Resources](./building-blocks/entities) - Creating and managing custom resources
- [Controllers](./building-blocks/controllers) - Implementing reconciliation logic
- [Finalizers](./building-blocks/finalizer) - Handling resource cleanup
- [Webhooks](./building-blocks/webhooks) - Implementing validation and mutation webhooks
- [Advanced Configuration](./advanced-configuration) - Leader election, durable queues, and finalizer management

Make sure to read these sections before deploying your operator to production.
:::

:::tip Learning Path
Take your time to understand each concept. Building operators is a complex task, but KubeOps makes it more approachable for .NET developers.
:::
